Guide: Scam tokens (#10115)
ethereum/ethereum-org-website: src/content/guides/how-to-id-scam-tokens/index.md

---
title: How to identify scam tokens

> description: What are scam tokens, how do they make themselves look legitimate, and how to detect them to avoid the scam.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: What are scam tokens, how do they make themselves look legitimate, and how to avoid them.
```

  For example, lets look at `wARB` again. [About 16% of the tokens](https://etherscan.io/token/0xb047c8032b99841713b8e3872f06cf32beb27b82?a=0x1c8db745abe3c8162119b9ef2c13864cd1fdd72f) are held by an address whose public tag is [Arbitrum Foundation: Deployer](https://etherscan.io/address/0x1c8db745abe3c8162119b9ef2c13864cd1fdd72f). This is *not* a fake address, it really is the address that [deployed the real ARB contract on Ethereum mainnet](https://etherscan.io/tx/0x242b50ab4fe9896cb0439cfe6e2321d23feede7eeceb31aa2dbb46fc06ed2670). 
  
  Because the ERC-20 balance of an address is part of the ERC-20 contract's storage, it can be specified by the contract to be whatever the contract developer wishes. It is also possible for a contract to forbid transfers so the legitimate users won't be able to get rid of those scam tokens.

- **Legitimate transfers**. *Legitimate owners wouldn't pay to transfer a scam token to others, so if there are transfers it must be legitimate, right?* **Wrong**. `Transfer` events are produced by the ERC-20 contract. A scammer can easily write the contract in such a way it will produce those actions.

> ## Scammy websites {#scammy-websites}
> Scammers can also produce very convincing websites, sometimes even precise clones of authentic sites with identical UIs, but with subtle tricks. Examples might be external links that seem legitimate actually sending the user to an external scam site, or incorrect instructions that guide the user to exposing their keys or sending funds to an attacker's address. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Scammy websites {#scammy-websites}

Scammers can also produce very convincing websites, sometimes even precise clones of authentic sites with identical UIs, but with subtle tricks. Examples might be external links that seem legitimate actually sending the user to an external scam site, or incorrect instructions that guide the user to exposing their keys or sending funds to an attacker's address. 
```

The best practise for avoiding this is to carefully check the URL for the sites you visit, and save addresses for known authentic sites in your bookmarks. Then, you can access the real site through your bookmarks without accidentally making spelling errors or relying on external links.

> ## How can you protect yourself? {#how-can-you-protect-yourself}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## How can you protect yourself? {#protect-yourself}
```

---
title: How to identify scam tokens
description: What are scam tokens, how do they make themselves look legitimate, and how to detect them to avoid the scam.
lang: en
---

# How to identify scam tokens {#how-to-identify-scam-tokens}

> One of the most common uses for Ethereum is for a group to create a tradable token, in a sense their own currency. These tokens typically follow a standard, [ERC-20](/developers/docs/standards/tokens/erc-20/). However, anywhere there are legitimate use cases that bring value, there are also criminals who try to steal that value for themselves. In this case, there are two way in which they are likely to do so:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One of the most common uses for Ethereum is for a group to create a tradable token, in a sense their own currency. These tokens typically follow a standard, [ERC-20](/developers/docs/standards/tokens/erc-20/). However, anywhere there are legitimate use cases that bring value, there are also criminals who try to steal that value for themselves.

There are two ways in which they are likely to deceive you:
```

- Try to sell you *scam tokens*, which look like the legitimate token you want to purchase, but are issued by the scammers and worth nothing.

> - Try to direct you into their own user interface, where they attempt to trick you into signing transactions that give them your ETH, your real tokens, etc. 

Reviewer 2: can you suggest a better phrasing? Also here is my knowledge limited, but i thought even just sign in with wallet (na gas payed) can open a person to exploitation.

> - Try to direct you into their own user interface, where they attempt to trick you into signing transactions that give them your ETH, your real tokens, etc. 

Reviewer 3: Maybe something like the following makes it clear it is the dishonest UI tricking you into doing something. The point is to get people to check that they are navigating to the right URL and not a spoof.

```suggestion
- Directing you into their own user interface where they attempt to trick you into signing transactions or approvals or exposing sensitive information that gives them access to your assets. These might be near-perfect clones of honest sites, but with hidden tricks.
```

> To illustrate what scam tokens are, and how to identify them, we are going to look at [`wARB`](https://etherscan.io/token/0xb047c8032b99841713b8e3872f06cf32beb27b82). This token attempts to look like the legitimate [`ARB`](https://etherscan.io/address/0xb50721bcf8d664c30412cfbc6cf7a15145234ad1) token.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To illustrate what scam tokens are, and how to identify them, we are going to look at a scam token [`wARB`](https://etherscan.io/token/0xb047c8032b99841713b8e3872f06cf32beb27b82). This token attempts to look like the legitimate [`ARB`](https://etherscan.io/address/0xb50721bcf8d664c30412cfbc6cf7a15145234ad1) token.
```

<ExpandableCard
title="What is ARB?"
contentPreview=''>

> <a href="https://developer.arbitrum.io/intro/">Arbitrum</a> is an organization that develops and manages <a href="/developers/docs/scaling/optimistic-rollups/">optimistic rollups</a>. Initially Arbitrum was organized as a for-profit company, but then <a href="https://arbitrumfoundation.medium.com/arbitrum-the-next-phase-of-decentralization-e7f8b37b5226">took steps to decentralize</a>. As part of that process, they issued a tradeable <a href="/dao/#token-based-membership">governance token</a>.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Arbitrum is an organization that develops and manages <a href="/developers/docs/scaling/optimistic-rollups/">optimistic rollups</a>. Initially Arbitrum was organized as a for-profit company, but thentook steps to decentralize. As part of that process, they issued a tradeable <a href="/dao/#token-based-membership">governance token</a>.
```

</ExpandableCard>

<ExpandableCard
title="Why is the scam token called wARB?"
contentPreview=''>
  

> There is a convention in Ethereum that when an asset is not ERC-20 compliant we create a "wrapped" version of it with the name starting with "w". So, for example, we have <a href="https://wbtc.network/">wBTC for bitcoin</a> and <a href="https://cointelegraph.com/news/what-is-wrapped-ethereum-weth-and-how-does-it-work">wETH for ether</a>.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There is a convention in Ethereum that when an asset is not ERC-20 compliant we create a "wrapped" version of it with the name starting with "w". So, for example, we have wBTC for bitcoin and <a href="https://cointelegraph.com/news/what-is-wrapped-ethereum-weth-and-how-does-it-work">wETH for ether</a>.
```

  
It does not make sense to create a wrapped version of an ERC-20 token that is already on Ethereum, but scammers rely on the appearance of legitimacy rather than the underlying reality.

</ExpandableCard>

## How do scam tokens work? {#how-do-scam-tokens-work}

The whole point of Ethereum is decentralization. This means that there is no central authority that can confiscate your assets or prevent you from deploying a smart contract. But it also means that scammers can deploy any smart contract they wish.

<ExpandableCard
title="What are smart contracts?"
contentPreview=''>
  
<a href="/developers/docs/smart-contracts/">Smart contracts</a> are the programs that run on top of the Ethereum blockchain. Every ERC-20 token, for example, is implemented as a smart contract.
  
</ExpandableCard>

Specifically, Arbitrum deployed a contract that uses the symbol `ARB`. But that doesn't stop other people from also deploying a contract that uses the exact same symbol, or a similar one. Whoever writes the contract gets to set what the contract will do.

## Appearing legitimate {#appearing-legitimate}

> There are several tricks that scam token creator pull to appear legitimate. They can do those, because they write the smart contract that implements the scam token. This means it can produce any effect they want from that contract.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are several tricks that scam token creators do to appear legitimate. 
```

- **Legitimate name and symbol**. As mentioned before, ERC-20 contracts can have the same symbol and name as other ERC-20 contracts. You cannot count on those fields for security.

- **Legitimate owners**. Scam tokens often airdrop significant balances to addresses that can be expected to be legitimate holders of the real token.

  For example, lets look at `wARB` again. [About 16% of the tokens](https://etherscan.io/token/0xb047c8032b99841713b8e3872f06cf32beb27b82?a=0x1c8db745abe3c8162119b9ef2c13864cd1fdd72f) are held by an address whose public tag is [Arbitrum Foundation: Deployer](https://etherscan.io/address/0x1c8db745abe3c8162119b9ef2c13864cd1fdd72f). This is *not* a fake address, it really is the address that [deployed the real ARB contract on Ethereum mainnet](https://etherscan.io/tx/0x242b50ab4fe9896cb0439cfe6e2321d23feede7eeceb31aa2dbb46fc06ed2670). 
  
  Because the ERC-20 balance of an address is part of the ERC-20 contract's storage, it can be specified by the contract to be whatever the contract developer wishes. It is also possible for a contract to forbid transfers so the legitimate users won't be able to get rid of those scam tokens.

> - **Legitimate transfers**. *Legitimate owners wouldn't pay to transfer a scam token around, so if there are transfers it must be legitimate, right?* Wrong. `Transfer` events are emitted by the ERC-20 contract. A scammer can easily write the contract in such a way it will emit those events, with any desired source and destination, at will. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Legitimate transfers**. *Legitimate owners wouldn't pay to transfer a scam token to others, so if there are transfers it must be legitimate, right?* **Wrong**. `Transfer` events are produced by the ERC-20 contract. 

A scammer can easily write the contract in such a way it will produce those actions.
```

> <ExpandableCard
> title="What are Transfer events?"
> contentPreview=''>
>   
> In theory a program running off-chain can view all the transactions that affected a particular ERC-20 contract from its initial deployment, and use that to identify transfers. In practice, doing this would require too much network bandwidth and CPU power. To allow for simpler analysis, ERC-20 contracts are <a href="https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-20#transfer-1">required by the standard</a> to emit events tagged as transfers whenever tokens are transferred from one account to another. <a href="https://docs.alchemy.com/docs/deep-dive-into-eth_getlogs#what-are-logs-or-events">Events</a> are written to the blockchain and indexed, which makes it a lot easier to obtain and analyze on-chain data.
>   
> </ExpandableCard>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

I think this is too complicated for the potential average reader of this article

> ## Scammy appearing website {#scammy-appearing-website}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Scammy websites {#scammy-websites}
```

> Another trick that scammers pull is to direct users to user interfaces that entice them to sign bad transactions. For example, one scam token ([view on explorer](https://optimistic.etherscan.io/token/0x15992f382d8c46d667b10dc8456dc36651af1452)) tried to direct users to `https://op-claim.xyz`. This link probably used to host a scam. It doesn't anymore, probably because the scammer has given up and stopped paying for web hosting.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Another trick that scammers pull is to direct users to user interfaces that entice them to sign bad transactions. For example, one scam token ([view on explorer](https://optimistic.etherscan.io/token/0x15992f382d8c46d667b10dc8456dc36651af1452)) tried to direct users to `https://op-claim.xyz`. This link probably used to host a scam. It doesn't anymore, because the scammer has given up and stopped paying for web hosting.
```

> 

Reviewer 3: Worth adding a note about sites that don't appear scammy??

```suggestion
Note that scammers can also produce very convincing websites, sometimes even precise clones of authentic sites with identical UIs, but with subtle tricks. Examples might be external links that seem legitimate actually sending the user to an external scam site, or incorrect instructions that guide the user to exposing their keys or sending funds to an attacker's address. 

The best practise for avoiding this is to carefully check the URL for the sites you visit, and save addresses for known authentic sites in your bookmarks. Then, you can access the real site through your bookmarks without accidentally making spelling errors or relying on external links.
```

## How can you protect yourself? {#how-can-you-protect-yourself}

1. **Check the contract address**. Legitimate tokens come from legitimate organizations, and you can see the contract addresses on the organization's web site. For example, [for `ARB` you can see the legitimate addresses here](https://docs.arbitrum.foundation/deployment-addresses#token). 

> 2. **Real tokens have liquidity**. Another option is to look at liquidity pool size on [Uniswap](https://uniswap.org/), one of the most common token swapping protocols. This protocol works using [liquidity pools](https://docs.uniswap.org/contracts/v2/concepts/core-concepts/pools), into which investors deposit their tokens in hope of a return from trading fees. Scam tokens typically have tiny liquidity pools, if any, because the scammers don't want to risk real assets. For example, the `ARB`/`ETH` Uniswap pool holds about a million dollars as I'm writing this ([see here for the up to date value](https://info.uniswap.org/#/pools/0x755e5a186f0469583bd2e80d1216e02ab88ec6ca)) and buying or selling a small amount is not going to change the price:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. **Real tokens have liquidity**. Another option is to look at liquidity pool size on [Uniswap](https://uniswap.org/), one of the most common token swapping protocols. This protocol works using liquidity pools, into which investors deposit their tokens in hope of a return from trading fees.

Scam tokens typically have tiny liquidity pools, if any, because the scammers don't want to risk real assets. For example, the `ARB`/`ETH` Uniswap pool holds about a million dollars ([see here for the up to date value](https://info.uniswap.org/#/pools/0x755e5a186f0469583bd2e80d1216e02ab88ec6ca)) and buying or selling a small amount is not going to change the price:
```

   ![Buying a legitimate token](./uniswap-real.png)

>    But if I try to buy `wARB`, even a tiny purchase would change the prince by over 90%:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   But when you try to buy the scam token `wARB`, even a tiny purchase would change the price by over 90%:
```

   ![Buying a scam token](./uniswap-scam.png)

   This is another piece of evidence that shows us `wARB` is not likely to be a legitimate token.

> 3. **Look in Etherscan**. A lot of scam tokens have already been identified as such, and are [marked in Etherscan](https://info.etherscan.com/etherscan-token-reputation/). While Etherscan is not authoritative source of truth (it is the nature of decentralized networks that there can't be an authoritative source for legitimacy), tokens that are identified by Etherscan as scams are likely to be scams.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. **Look in Etherscan**. A lot of scam tokens have already been identified and reported by the community. Such tokens are [marked in Etherscan](https://info.etherscan.com/etherscan-token-reputation/). While Etherscan is not authoritative source of truth (it is the nature of decentralized networks that there can't be an authoritative source for legitimacy), tokens that are identified by Etherscan as scams are likely to be scams.
```

---
title: How to identify scam tokens
description: What are scam tokens, how do they make themselves look legitimate, and how to detect them to avoid the scam.
lang: en
---

> # How to identify scam tokens

Reviewer 4: I'm noticing some of the other guides need these as well, but we should add custom header ids here (this is most important for translations)
```suggestion
# How to identify scam tokens {#how-to-identify-scam-tokens}
```

One of the most common uses for Ethereum is for a group to create a tradable token, in a sense their own currency. These tokens typically follow a standard, [ERC-20](/developers/docs/standards/tokens/erc-20/). However, anywhere there are legitimate use cases that bring value, there are also criminals who try to steal that value for themselves. In this case, there are two way in which they are likely to do so:

- Try to sell you *scam tokens*, which look like the legitimate token you want to purchase, but are issued by the scammers and worth nothing.
- Try to direct you into their own user interface, where they attempt to trick you into signing transactions that give them your ETH, your real tokens, etc. 

To illustrate what scam tokens are, and how to identify them, we are going to look at [`wARB`](https://etherscan.io/token/0xb047c8032b99841713b8e3872f06cf32beb27b82). This token attempts to look like the legitimate [`ARB`](https://etherscan.io/address/0xb50721bcf8d664c30412cfbc6cf7a15145234ad1) token.

<ExpandableCard
title="What is ARB?"
contentPreview=''>

> [Arbitrum](https://developer.arbitrum.io/intro/) is an organization that develops and manages [optimistic rollups](/developers/docs/scaling/optimistic-rollups/). Initially Arbitrum was organized as a for-profit company, but they recently [started to decentralize](https://arbitrumfoundation.medium.com/arbitrum-the-next-phase-of-decentralization-e7f8b37b5226). As part of that process, they issued a tradeable [governance token](/dao/#token-based-membership).

Reviewer 4: This has been an ongoing challenge getting our MDX components (React components within markdown pages) to mix well with nested markdown syntax, and to also be handled appropriately when the content makes it to Crowdin for translation.

The solution we've decided in the meantime has been sticking with `html` while inside a React component within a markdown page. This has been the most reliable at rendering correctly, and being parsed properly by Crowdin.

Even though this one renders okay, we should switch it for Crowdin, and consistency throughout.

```suggestion
<a href="https://developer.arbitrum.io/intro/">Arbitrum</a> is an organization that develops and manages <a href="/developers/docs/scaling/optimistic-rollups/">optimistic rollups</a>. Initially Arbitrum was organized as a for-profit company, but they recently <a href="https://arbitrumfoundation.medium.com/arbitrum-the-next-phase-of-decentralization-e7f8b37b5226">started to decentralize</a>. As part of that process, they issued a tradeable <a href="/dao/#token-based-membership">governance token</a>.
```

Reviewer 4: Also, to help this stand the test of time more, perhaps we change away from "but they recently started to decentralize" and just say "but then took steps to decentralize" (or something similar that removes the relative "recently"

</ExpandableCard>

<ExpandableCard
title="Why is the scam token called wARB?"
contentPreview=''>
  

> There is a convention in Ethereum that when an asset is not ERC-20 compliant we create a "wrapped" version of it with the name starting with w. So, for example, we have [wBTC for Bitcoin](https://wbtc.network/) and [wETH for Ether](https://cointelegraph.com/news/what-is-wrapped-ethereum-weth-and-how-does-it-work).

Reviewer 4: Per site style guide, lowercased currency names for ether and bitcoin.
Also, suggesting we add quote wrappers around the "w" to make it more readable.

```suggestion
There is a convention in Ethereum that when an asset is not ERC-20 compliant we create a "wrapped" version of it with the name starting with "w". So, for example, we have <a href="https://wbtc.network/">wBTC for bitcoin</a> and <a href="https://cointelegraph.com/news/what-is-wrapped-ethereum-weth-and-how-does-it-work">wETH for ether</a>.
```

> It does not make sense to create a wrapped version of an ERC-20 token that is already on Ethereum. But scammers rely on the appearance of legitimacy rather than the underlying reality.

Reviewer 4: Small grammar suggestion
```suggestion
It does not make sense to create a wrapped version of an ERC-20 token that is already on Ethereum, but scammers rely on the appearance of legitimacy rather than the underlying reality.
```

</ExpandableCard>

> ## How do scam tokens work?

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## How do scam tokens work? {#how-do-scam-tokens-work}
```

The whole point of Ethereum is decentralization. This means that there is no central authority that can confiscate your assets or prevent you from deploying a smart contract. But it also means that scammers can deploy any smart contract they wish.

<ExpandableCard
title="What are smart contracts?"
contentPreview=''>
  

> [Smart contracts](/developers/docs/smart-contracts/) are the programs that run on top of the Ethereum blockchain. Every ERC-20 token, for example, is implemented as a smart contract.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
<a href="/developers/docs/smart-contracts/">Smart contracts</a> are the programs that run on top of the Ethereum blockchain. Every ERC-20 token, for example, is implemented as a smart contract.
```

  
</ExpandableCard>

Specifically, Arbitrum deployed a contract that uses the symbol `ARB`. But that doesn't stop other people from also deploying a contract that uses the exact same symbol, or a similar one. Whoever writes the contract gets to set what the contract will do.

> ## Appearing legitimate

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Appearing legitimate {#appearing-legitimate}
```

  
  Because the ERC-20 balance of an address is part of the ERC-20 contract's storage, it can be specified by the contract to be whatever the contract developer wishes. It is also possible for a contract to forbid transfers so the legitimate users won't be able to get rid of those scam tokens.

- **Legitimate transfers**. *Legitimate owners wouldn't pay to transfer a scam token around, so if there are transfers it must be legitimate, right?* Wrong. `Transfer` events are emitted by the ERC-20 contract. A scammer can easily write the contract in such a way it will emit those events, with any desired source and destination, at will. 

<ExpandableCard
title="What are `Transfer` events?"
contentPreview=''>
  

> In theory a program running offchain can view all the transactions that affected a particular ERC-20 contract from its initial deployment, and use that to identify transfers. In practice, doing this would require too much network bandwidth and CPU power. To allow for simpler analysis, ERC-20 contracts are [required by the standard](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-20#transfer-1) to emit events tagged as transfers whenever tokens are transferred from one account to another. [Events](https://docs.alchemy.com/docs/deep-dive-into-eth_getlogs#what-are-logs-or-events) are written to the blockchain and indexed, which makes it a lot easier to obtain and analyse onchain data.

Reviewer 4: "off-chain" and "on-chain" for consistency with rest of site, and "analyze" per style guide

```suggestion
In theory a program running off-chain can view all the transactions that affected a particular ERC-20 contract from its initial deployment, and use that to identify transfers. In practice, doing this would require too much network bandwidth and CPU power. To allow for simpler analysis, ERC-20 contracts are <a href="https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-20#transfer-1">required by the standard</a> to emit events tagged as transfers whenever tokens are transferred from one account to another. <a href="https://docs.alchemy.com/docs/deep-dive-into-eth_getlogs#what-are-logs-or-events">Events</a> are written to the blockchain and indexed, which makes it a lot easier to obtain and analyze on-chain data.
```

  
</ExpandableCard>

## Scammy UI

> Another trick that scammers pull is to direct users to user interfaces that entice them to sign bad transactions. For example, [this scam token](https://optimistic.etherscan.io/token/0x15992f382d8c46d667b10dc8456dc36651af1452) tried to direct users to `https://op-claim.xyz`. This link probably used to host a scam. It doesn't anymore, probably because the scammer has given up and stopped paying for web hosting.

Reviewer 4: Subtle, but instead of linking over "this scam token" (not exactly an inviting link 😆) I might mention it, then leave a "view on explorer" link, ie:

```suggestion
Another trick that scammers pull is to direct users to user interfaces that entice them to sign bad transactions. For example, one scam token ([view on explorer](https://optimistic.etherscan.io/token/0x15992f382d8c46d667b10dc8456dc36651af1452)) tried to direct users to `https://op-claim.xyz`. This link probably used to host a scam. It doesn't anymore, probably because the scammer has given up and stopped paying for web hosting.
```

> ## Conclusion: What can you trust?

Reviewer 4: This section feels like we should re-word to be the actionable section. It's where we get into ways users can take what they've learned and protect themselves.

I would suggest changing this h2 label, adjust as needed to make this section about protecting yourself, and steps users can take.

Then add a quick "Conclusion" section beneath that sums up the various attack vectors, and quick recap of defenses, perhaps with a reminder that there is no magic bullet to security, but we all need to take a multifaceted approach to staying safe.
